Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
The Capital Programme
Consistent with previous years, Tynwald is being asked to approve the value needed to
complete discrete schemes within the Capital Programme where further funding or new
funding is required. This recognises that it is very unlikely that a capital project will be halted
once it has been started and this also allows Departments some certainty to engage with
contractors and suppliers in the knowledge that the project cost has been approved across
multiple financial years.
Departments provided the indicative spend phasing of their new capital projects and active
ongoing capital schemes to show the expected cash flow requirements across the life of the
project. This has also allowed Treasury to plan for the overall funding requirement for the
Capital Programme each year.
The overall spending for a project is split across financial years by the relevant Department
but the single project approval process allows flexibility to be built into this where necessary.
Spending can be adjusted to an extent across a project to deal with potential delays and timing
differences that are often experienced between one financial year and the next.
Following the initial approval for a capital project by Tynwald, there will be no requirement for
a Department to obtain further Tynwald approval in relation to the project unless there is an
expected overspend. In these cases, the Departments will still be required to return to Tynwald
to obtain a further approval for any additional spending in excess of the approved budget.
The process above only applies to discrete, identifiable capital projects. Rolling schemes, such
as ongoing capital maintenance schemes and minor capital works schemes, will be subject to
annual approval by Tynwald due to their periodic nature.
The Project Development Fund continues to be available and will be increased by a further £5
million for the 2025-26 financial year.
The Project Development Fund allows Departments to make bids against the Terms of
Reference to fully develop a scheme through investigation, design, planning consents and
procurement. Ultimately, this should allow accurate costs and timeline data to be presented
within a fully developed business case for consideration by SACIC, Treasury Board, Council
of Ministers and ultimately Tynwald, as appropriate.
6.2 2024-25 Performance
The actual expected annual capital spend (excluding borrowing authorities and property
purchases) has been lower than budgeted for 2024-25. The projected overall spend for the
current year is £75.4 million compared to the overall budget of £101.3 million (excluding
projects that are funded outside of the CFR and CLF). The budget utilisation for 2024-25 is
therefore expected to be around 74%, which is predominately a result of lower than budgeted
CLF loan drawdowns.
6.3 2025-26 Budget
The total proposed Central Government funded Capital Programme for 2025-26 is £135.5
million (£87.4 million from the CFR and £48.1 million from the CLF).
Across the period of the indicative financial plan, the Central Government funded Capital
Programme totals £508.4 million (£299.8 million from the CFR and £208.6 million from the
CLF).
The CFR financed programme includes £53.4 million of proposed new funding across discrete
and rolling schemes for approval (£6.3 million for discrete schemes and £47.1 million in rolling
schemes).
The 2025-26 CLF financed programme includes Manx Utilities schemes, which have been
reordered to better reflect how spending is managed operationally.
35