Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Revenue – Expenditure
4.3 2025-26 Budget Proposals
The following sections present the proposals for the various areas of Government income in
respect of the 2025-26 financial year.
4.3.1 Customs & Immigration
The revenues raised by Customs & Excise include “shared” duties under the 1979 Customs
and Excise Agreement; and “non-shared” duties.
“Shared” Duties
The “shared” duties are VAT, Soft Drinks Industry Levy (SDIL), Excise (alcohol, tobacco and
hydrocarbon oil - HCO), Plastic Packaging Tax and Customs (import) duties. All of the “shared”
duties except for HCO are shared using the arrangements described below to calculate the
Island’s share of the joint revenue pools with the United Kingdom. HCO is calculated on the
basis of actual consumption during the focal year. The Island is committed by the 1979
Customs & Excise Agreement to keep the rates and rules surrounding the “shared” duties in
line with UK policy with a limited number of exceptions.
Calculation of VAT and shared duties
The Final Expenditure Revenue and Sharing Arrangement (FERSA) outlines the method of
calculation of the Island’s share of VAT and shared duties under the 1979 Customs & Excise
Agreement. Accordingly, the Isle of Man Government must undertake surveys every 5 years
to determine as accurately as possible the amount of VAT that is incurred by Island residents
and businesses. The most recent year used for indexation was 2018-19. Under the FERSA it
was agreed that provisional indexation rates of 4.35% for VAT and 1.58% for the other duties
and the Soft Drinks Industry Levy (SDIL) would be used to account for inflation and growth in
the economy for five years up to and including 2023-24. In the absence of an updated figure,
this indexation level has been used for 2025-26 and as the basis of calculation for future
income for the period of the indicative financial plan presented. The surveys for 2023-24 have
been completed and the FERSA calculations are underway. The indexation will be reviewed
and adjusted once the FERSA calculations have been finalised.
Should the survey results evidence the growth in the economy has deviated from that
predicted, the Island’s share of VAT for previous years 2019-20 to 2023-24 and 2024-25 will
need to be adjusted which could result in an adjusting payment to or from the UK Government.
“Non-shared” duties
The “non-shared” duties are Air Passenger Duty, Gambling Duty (including both online and
machine games duty), Lottery Duty and non-revenue receipts (fines, penalties and interest).
The Island is free to choose where and how it applies these duties; however, no changes from
existing policy are proposed within this Budget.
19