Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
The Reserves
7.2 External Reserves
The purpose of each external fund is set out within the investment mandates and forms part
of the formal contract with each of the investment managers. All investment mandates and
benchmarks remain on an absolute return basis. Details of the investment mandates are
published within the Government Accounts, which can be viewed on the Treasury website.
7.3 Internal Reserves
The Treasury was granted devolved authority to transfer funding between the internal reserves
without further recourse to Tynwald as part of the 2018-19 budget process. Through this
devolved authority, the Treasury has flexibility to transfer funding to areas where it is needed
at short notice.
For the 2025-26 budget, the Treasury has recommended the following transfers to the internal
funds:
• Agriculture and Forestry Fund - £4 million in order to support the Isle of Man Meat
Plant and the Agri-Environment Scheme.
• Contingency Fund - £5.5 million to provide funding for unanticipated and unforeseen
costs that may arise within Departments. This transfer has been reduced from prior
years to reflect the fact that Departments should be returning to a more predictable
level of spending following several years of extreme unforeseen volatility. A further
£2.8 million is provided as a contribution from general revenue.
• Transformation Fund - £2.5 million to make funding available to finance initiatives
aimed at digitising and automating processes in order to achieve efficiencies and cost
savings. A further £2.8 million is provided as a contribution from general revenue.
• Healthcare Transformation Fund – £4 million is proposed to be added to this fund in
order to continue to support the ongoing work in this area to implement the
recommendations within the Sir Jonathan Michael Report.
• Legal Costs Reserve – A further £0.75 million is proposed to be transferred to
replenish the fund balance. There is a continued demand for access to this funding
from a number of areas of Government. The unpredictable nature of these costs mean
that it is difficult to establish accurate budgets in this area.
• Medical Indemnity Fund – £3 million top up is proposed to this fund in order to
maintain the balance going forward in order to meet future liability demands.
• Project Development Fund – A further £5 million is proposed to be added to this fund
in order to support the initial capital funding process and allow Departments to
complete full design and feasibility activities in order to more accurately scope and cost
capital projects.
• Housing and Communities Fund – £1 million is to be transferred to this fund to
support of work of the Housing and Communities Board going forward.
• Housing Deficiency Fund - £2 million is to be transferred to this newly created fund
to top up the £7.5 million being transferred from the DOI in relation to the Housing
Deficiency funding previously held within their revenue budget.
7.4 2024-25 Reserves Performance
The projected probable income and expenditure for 2024-25 in respect of each of the internally
and externally managed funds is presented in Table 22.
43