Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
The Capital Programme
6. THE CAPITAL PROGRAMME
6.1 Overview
The Capital Programme covers construction and maintenance of the Island’s strategic assets.
Projects range from the construction of new assets, such as critical infrastructure,
reconstruction of replacement assets that have come to the end of their useful life and also
the provision of necessary equipment and vehicles for the delivery of vital services, including
the emergency services.
The maintenance and improvement of existing assets is financed through the Capital
Programme to ensure that they remain fit for purpose and that they are preserved for future
generations.
The Capital Programme also funds large scale information and communications technology
projects to ensure that Government systems and equipment is up to date to allow the effective
delivery of public services. In recent years, the shift to subscription based IT services is seeing
a reduction in capital costs but a corresponding increase in revenue costs.
The Capital Programme is shown in detail in Appendix 4 and is analysed to show those
projects that are funded from the Capital Financing Reserve (CFR), projects that are funded
through the Consolidated Loans Fund (CLF) and those that are directly funded by a relevant
Authority.
The CFR is partly funded from general revenue with the level of funding from general revenue
increasing over the medium term. The medium term financial plan projects that capital will be
fully funded in 2028-29 and going forward, with previous years’ shortfalls being supported from
general reserves. This is highlighted within the receipts noted within Table 2. It should be
noted that in the final two years of the financial plan the amount of general revenue funding
into the CFR is above the current estimated delivery cost, however it is considered prudent to
bolster the CFR when possible to do so.
The CLF continues to fund borrowing for entities that are outside of Central Government.
Repayments are made to the CLF by means of loan charges and these receipts support the
future funding payments and loans. The loan charges include an element of interest linked to
the borrowing outstanding. The rate of interest applicable for the 2025-26 financial year is
proposed to remain at 5%. Where refinancing has occurred using the proceeds of the
Government debt issue then a rate of 1.7% has been applied to reflect the reduced cost of
borrowing associated with the external debt.
Some preliminary funding for Energy Transition has been included, however further funding
will be determined once there is certainty of the delivery model.
The CFR and the CLF will also receive funds from the sale of capital assets, known as capital
receipts, which have been financed from the relevant source.
Capital budgets for 2025-26 and for the period of the indicative financial plan have been
reviewed and revised to reflect the current expectations of the phasing of spending going
forward. The amendments and new bids have been reviewed by the Strategic Assets and
Capital Investment Committee (SACIC), which is a sub-committee of the Treasury, before
onward endorsement being granted by the Treasury Board and the Council of Ministers.
Business cases are submitted by Departments, which are then considered in the context of
the priorities of Government as they stand at the relevant time, criticality, affordability and
deliverability within the overall Capital Programme and funding resources available. This
follows dialogue with the relevant Department that has submitted the business case.
34