Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
2025-26 Budget
1. INTRODUCTION FROM THE MINISTER – BUDGET 2025-26
A Responsible Budget for a Sustainable Future
This decade has seen a number of unprecedented events which have challenged our society
and economy. A worldwide pandemic, a war in Europe, sudden increases in interest rates and
an inflationary surge caused by a sharp rise in energy costs have led to significant pressures
being felt by individuals, families, companies and our Government.
While the economic outlook for the coming year appears more settled, significant risks and
opportunities remain. It is crucial that the Isle of Man positions itself to capitalise on these
opportunities and mitigate risks in the medium term. Central to this effort is a firm commitment
to achieving the aims of Our Island Plan and the Economic Strategy.
The increasing demands on frontline services and meeting the costs of providing them were
the key elements underpinning the 2024-25 Isle of Man Budget. There were significant
increases in spending in our health service, social care and education systems.
There were also a range of initiatives made to support our local economy through schemes
aimed to leverage private investment, provide more accessible and affordable childcare, and
increase skills and training to enable companies to expand their workforce.
To maintain our reserves there was a temporary increase in the higher rate of Income Tax
from 20 to 22% with a commitment to review the National Insurance system and benefit
thresholds.
I am grateful to the dedicated staff at the Treasury who have undertaken significant analysis
and review of our current finances. There has also been extensive work carried out
internationally to maintain our compliance with existing financial conventions whilst also
developing new international agreements on the corporation tax paid by large multinationals.
Key to our Island’s resilience and way of life is economic confidence and certainty.
This Budget builds on a medium term financial plan set out at the start of this administration
to responsibly deliver financial stability whilst sustaining our reserves and reducing the prudent
use of them over a five year period.
Following last year’s Budget, Government went out to meet people around the Island and
listen to their views, hopes and fears. Key to a lot of these discussions was the need for
Government to lead by example; become more efficient and productive through identifying
and reducing unnecessary bureaucracy and making it easier for people to interact with
departments.
We have listened and heard also from people within the organisation how services can be
improved and savings made. The 2025-26 Budget bakes in efficiency savings and will present
challenges for all us who seek to serve our community, but I am confident we can rise to this
challenge and continue our work towards a more secure, vibrant and sustainable Island nation
for all.
Yours truly,
Hon Dr Alex Allinson MHK
Minister for the Treasury
3