Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Five Year Financial Plan
3.6 Capital Programme
The successful delivery of the Capital Programme continues to rely on its affordability and
sustainability. The trend for Government’s actual capital expenditure outturn to be lower than
budgeted levels continues. The typical level of capital delivery remains at around £60 million
to £80 million per year.
The anticipated capital expenditure for 2025-26 is approximately £90 million which remains
relatively consistent with prior years. This is the combined position between the Consolidated
Loans Fund (CLF) and the Capital Financing Reserve (CFR), which is explained in more detail
below. This is compared to a Capital Programme of approximately £135.5 million for 2025-26
on a full delivery basis.
Table 5 presents the combined capital account on an estimated delivery basis. This shows
the illustrative position based on actual expected delivery of the Capital Programme based on
prior experience rather than delivery of the full Capital Programme presented within Appendix
4. It has been assumed that £60 million of capital spending will be delivered per year for CFR
funded projects and between £20 million and £40 million of spending from projects funded
through the CLF. The CLF spend in the first three years of the financial plan is higher than in
the later years as a result of the impact of the regional sewage works planned. The later years
are still expected to be higher than the previously estimated delivery amount of £15 million,
which takes into account the impact of inflationary pressures as well as planned works.
The transfers to the CFR and CLF from reserves are based on the estimated Capital
Programme amounts, rather than full delivery. This is a realistic approach to the capital
budgeting process.
3.6.1 Review of the Capital Programme
The focus of the Capital Programme for 2025-26 will continue to be the delivery of projects
that have already commenced and the maintenance of existing assets. The number of new
capital projects included within the Capital Programme may initially appear small however it is
expected that further schemes will be brought to Tynwald for approval during the year as part
of the capital approval process.
Departments have actively been making bids to the Project Development Fund in order to
perform design and feasibility work and produce fully scoped and costed business cases. A
full list of the projects that have been granted PDF funding are shown within Appendix 5.
3.6.2 Capital Approval Process
Departments are able to seek Tynwald approval for capital schemes on a quarterly basis.
Further schemes may be added to the Capital Programme during the coming year, subject to
concurrence from Treasury’s Strategic Assets and Capital Investment Committee, Treasury
Board, the Council of Ministers and by Tynwald as appropriate.
14