Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
The Reserves
7. THE RESERVES
7.1 Overview
Government’s reserves are made up of internal and external funds. Summaries of each of the
reserve uses is included at Appendix 7.
The internal funds assist with funding costs that are difficult to predict due to their unforeseen
nature or due to their high levels of cost volatility year on year. Including these items within
the revenue budget would distort the annual forecasts and would create a risk of setting
inappropriate budget levels for Departments.
The 2025-26 budget relies on the utilisation of £110.6 million of reserves, compared to an
estimated fund use of £98.4 million for the 2024-25 financial year. This can be used as a proxy
for Government’s underlying operating deficit. As previously noted, it is planned to reduce the
reliance on the use of reserves going forward through the period of the financial plan. Funding
for the Capital Programme is included on a maximum exposure basis, being the estimated
delivery basis of £60 million per year for the Capital Financing Reserve programme. Planning
for the full possible exposure for the Capital Programme is considered to be the most
responsible approach to budgetary forecasting.
For the first three years of the financial plan presented the level of revenue funding available
to contribute towards capital expenditure remains lower than the planned Capital Programme
which leads to the requirement to draw from reserves. In 2025-26 it is planned to make a
contribution of £19 million from General Revenue to the Capital Financing Reserve, however
the budgeted spending is £60 million. This deficit reduces over the next few years until the
Capital Programme is fully funded from General Revenue in 2028-29.
The effects of recent inflationary pressure continue to be felt by departments which has
impacted on spending and leading to a continuing internal fund use.
Investment returns on externally invested reserves are forecast at around £40.2 million,
reflecting the revised investment strategy and mandated returns. Future years assume a level
of prudency to reflect possible market volatility. It is assumed that markets will return to more
stable levels in the medium term and so this prudence measure reduces towards the final
years of the financial plan. The returns forecast have also been adjusted to reflect the
expected drawdowns on reserves, which will limit the ability to capitalise on improved market
conditions.
Actual returns may be in excess or below the planned levels within the indicative financial
plan.
A summary of the projected reserves usage is shown within Table 21.
41