Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Appendix 7 – Explanation of Reserves
APPENDIX 7 – EXPLANATION OF RESERVES
External Reserves
Enterprise Development Scheme (EDS)
As part of the 2016 budget, the Enterprise Development Fund was created with an initial £10m,
supporting the £50m Enterprise Development Scheme. The Scheme did not perform as
expected, with only £3m invested in the first two years and consequently in 2018, the
Department for Enterprise (DfE) and the Scheme Managers agreed to part company.
DfE revised the Scheme to manage it in house for existing applicants, and the Scheme has
been largely inoperative since 2020, remaining simply as a vehicle for historic investments.
Manx Currency Account
The balance on the currency account is maintained to ensure that it more than matches the
value of the total Manx currency in circulation (both notes and coins).
MUA Bond Repayment Fund
Responsibility for the management of the Manx Utilities Authority (MUA) bond issues
transferred from the MUA to the Treasury on 1 April 2015. The MUA makes annual payments
through its Long-Term Financial Plan into a sinking fund in order that the £260 million bond
issues can be repaid upon their maturity in 2030 (£75 million) and 2034 (£185 million).
Bond Repayment Sinking Fund
This has been established to provide a fund into which repayments from General Revenue,
the Isle of Man Steam Packet and Manx Utilities Authority can be made. These funds will be
used to meet the redemption of the Sustainable Bond issued by the Treasury in September
2021, which becomes payable on 14 September 2051. Interest payments to bondholders will
be made from this fund. Balances held within the fund will be invested to earn income in
accordance with relevant investment mandates.
National Insurance Fund (MNIF)
The MNIF is comprised of both the National Insurance Investment Account (NIIA), which is
invested by external investment managers on behalf of the Treasury, and the National
Insurance Operating Account (NIOA), which represents the operating balance managed by
the Treasury’s Social Security Division. The NIOA is used to fund National Insurance funded
welfare payments and also makes a significant contribution towards the cost of the Island’s
health service via the NHS allocation. It is expected that there will be a surplus over the period
of the indicative financial plan, therefore the fund will increase in value.
Reserve Fund
The Reserve Fund represents the externally invested central funds of the Isle of Man
Government, designed to provide long term stability and protection to Government’s finances.
The objective of the current financial plan is to grow the balances held within the Reserve
Fund through external investment management.
86