Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Revenue – Expenditure
Other Contributors
From April 2025, the voluntary Class 3 NIC rate will increase from £18.95 per week to £19.70
per week.
Manx National Insurance Fund
The Manx National Insurance Fund is used to supplement the amount of NIC collected in a
tax year where the income from these contributions does not cover the expenditure on
National Insurance funded benefits. Further details of this can be seen in Table 16 at Section
5.5.
4.3.3 Departmental Fees and Charges
Departmental fees and charges targets have generally been uplifted in line with the level of
inflation in the Isle of Man as at September 2024 plus 1% to adequately recover the costs
incurred.
Detailed breakdowns of the individual fees and charges are not included within this document
as changes can be made subsequent to the publication of the Budget. Reference should be
made to the website of the relevant department or body for the detailed information. Fee
Orders to automatically uplift fees are set to be introduced to coincide with the beginning of
the 2025-26 financial year.
4.3.4 Investment Income
Treasury investment income is derived from the externally managed investment funds,
dividends and interest earned from cash managed directly within the Treasury. The investment
income forecast includes an expectation of a levy from the Isle of Man Post Office and dividend
from the Isle of Man Steam Packet Group forecast to be £1 million from each for the financial
year 2025-26.
The tender exercise to appoint a new panel of investment managers in respect of the external
reserves is near completion. The appointment of the new investment managers and transition
of the portfolio is now expected to be completed by the end of March 2025 which will then
allow the updated investment strategy to be implemented.
The current panel of five investment managers were appointed for a period of 5 years from 1
April 2016 and will remain in place until the appointment of the new managers has been
completed.
The appointment of a panel of investment managers provides a diversification of investment
management and style. Detailed information regarding the parameters of the investment
mandates in place are included within the Isle of Man Government Annual Financial
Statements and Report that is available on the Treasury website.
The performance and delivery mandates require the investment managers to achieve certain
levels of growth within the reserves under their management to meet set benchmarks but
within acceptable levels of risk over a rolling three year period. Income is generated from
profits gained through the sale of equities, funds and bonds; dividends and coupon interest
earned from equities and bonds and interest on cash based instruments.
A small element of this income relates to miscellaneous Treasury income, for example, late
tax return filing penalty fees.
23