Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Appendix 7 – Explanation of Reserves
Internal Reserves
Academic Business Planning Fund (ABPF)
The ABPF was established as part of the 2017-18 budget on a one year trial basis. The reserve
allows the Department of Education, Sport and Culture (DESC) to transfer year end
underspends into the new financial year, as agreed with the Treasury. This provides DESC
with flexibility in its business planning for operations where the financial year does not fit with
the academic year. This initiative has proven very successful and therefore was extended on
a permanent basis.
Agriculture and Forestry Fund (AFF)
The AFF was originally established in 2007 to assist the Department of Environment, Food
and Agriculture (DEFA) in providing funding for additional financial support to the agriculture
sector. The fund is utilised to support initiatives that are designed to provide sustainable
benefits for the sector in the longer term and to provide support for the sector in the event of
unexpected circumstances. The Treasury has agreed to add £4 million in 2025-26 to continue
to support the Isle of Man meat plant and the agri-enviroment scheme.
Contingency Fund (CF)
Established in 2016-17 with a £5 million injection from the Revenue Account’s Operating
Balance, this fund arose from a need to ensure that funding is provided to meet any
unexpected, unavoidable or unplanned occurrences that are not included in the departmental
revenue targets. Items granted funding from here must be of a temporary nature or self-
sustainable from ongoing savings generated. Recurring expenditure is not eligible. It is
proposed to add a further £5.5 million to this fund for the 2025-26 financial year.
Transformation Fund (TF)
The purpose of this fund is to enable departments to implement schemes that are aimed at
achieving efficiencies through cost savings and streamlining of processes. The fund
incorporates the aims and purposes of the previous Digital Strategy and Invest to Save funds.
It is proposed to add a further £2.5 million to this fund for the 2025-26 financial year.
Economic Strategy Fund (ESF)
In support of the Island’s Economic Strategy, the Treasury allocated £100 million to the ESF
in the 2023-24 financial year to help deliver this strategy.
Healthcare Transformation Fund (HCTF)
The HCTF is designed to provide financing for the implementation of healthcare project
initiatives that are of a transformational nature. It is intended that any surplus National
Insurance receipts due for allocation into the NHS are redirected into this fund to support future
projects. Following completion of Sir Jonathan Michael’s Independent Review of the Isle of
Man Health and Social Care System, delivered to Tynwald in 2019, this fund is being utilised
to provide support to the Health and Care Transformation Team with the ongoing process of
establishing Manx Care and other healthcare transformation projects. The Treasury has
approved a further transfer into the fund in 2025-26 of £4 million to ensure that there are
adequate resources available.
88