Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Five Year Financial Plan
3.3 Revenue Account
Basis of preparation
The 2025 budget presents a financial plan for the next five years which determines
departmental funding allocations that, if adhered to over the five years, will reduce the reliance
on our general reserves and will deliver improved, more robust and sustainable finances for
the Island.
Delivery of the financial plan will be challenging and there are a great many uncertainties and
risks that will need to be managed to ensure its achievement.
Being a plan, there are also many assumptions that underpin the budget targets and
allocations. These include a stable economic and inflationary environment with a continued
growth in taxation and other income sources.
For example, the Island has committed to the introduction of the Pillar Two minimum tax
framework and income estimates have been factored in. These will not have any material
impact in the next two years and amounts are estimates however initially £35 million per
annum could be achieved. There is uncertainty in these forecasts and how the new tax will
impact on the global and our own economy. The long term expected or stable revenues will
not be apparent for some time to come. To mitigate this situation Treasury considers the
forecasted income included in the plan to be prudent, with any additional income over and
above the estimated total to be treated as a windfall in the early years.
The NHS Allocation for 2025-26 has been revised upwards due to the availability of more
accurate statistical information alongside a policy based amendment to the calculation to
facilitate additional funding to the NHS following the reduction in the income tax rate from 22%
to 21%. In total this increases the allocation from a forecast £54.7 million in the 2024-25 Pink
Book to £71.0 million, with £6.3 million being due to the statistical revision and the remaining
£10 million from the policy change raising the NHS allocation from 19.3% to 24.8%.
A key facet of the plan is the control of expenditure so that it grows at a slower rate than
income. There are considerable pressures on public expenditure and control in line with the
budgets will require delivery of broad efficiencies and cost control strategies. Treasury has
introduced enhanced financial monitoring during the current year and the plan makes available
funding to invest to save in the longer term. In addition contingency funding has been included
under the control of the Treasury to provide a buffer against increasing costs. Whilst an
allocation of £10m has been made for 2025-26 it remains to be seen if this will be sufficient
and further funding, income generation or costs reductions may be required.
In recent years, capital spending has been lower than estimated and this budget has reduced
the estimated spend from £70 million to £60 million each year. This reduction is offset by
funding for other capital initiatives which include the Island Infrastructure Scheme, the Energy
Efficiency Scheme and large projects being undertaken by Manx Utilities and the Manx
Development Corporation. Should there be a need for significantly higher levels of capital
investment, other forms of funding may need to be considered. For example the Island’s
Energy Transition Strategy has yet to be fully defined, but the costs will be significant. The
funding requirement and strategy are not included within this plan and will need to be
developed separately.
So in summary, the five year plan is simply that, a plan. It is not a forecast or indeed a detailed
analysis of how individual or multiple risks could impact the Island’s finances. Underpinning it
are multiple strategies, control mechanisms and mitigation plans and their implementation will
be key in achieving the longer term objectives.
8