Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Five Year Financial Plan
3.2 Economic Overview
Economic conditions have been broadly stable in the Isle of Man since the 2024-25 Budget
was prepared. Inflation as measured by the Consumer Prices Index (CPI) has gradually fallen
from around 5% at the end of 2023 to 1.9% in October 2024. This position has followed the
situation in the UK. There has been an overall moderation in underlying price pressures, with
energy cost growth slowing and reversing in some areas. That said, absolute price levels
remain higher than levels seen prior to when the inflationary period began in late 2021. Natural
gas prices have notably fallen from the extreme peaks seen in late 2022, but have been
gradually creeping back up during 2024. The oil price has been somewhat volatile but
generally has not seen dramatic peaks since the outbreak of hostilities in the Middle East at
the end of 2023. Spare global production capacity and overall sluggish economic growth in
some key economies continues to provide some cushion from large increases in the oil price.
Services inflation effects continue to be felt, with some evidence of moderation of price growth
in the domestic economy.
The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) and Bank of England CPI forecasts are now more
closely aligned as of the publication of the UK Autumn Statement on 30 October. These
forecasts are for UK CPI to rise slightly from its current level of around 2% to 2.5-3% in early
2025, before gradually settling down to the 2% target around the middle of 2026. This
represents an increase compared to the previous OBR forecast (March 2024) which had
anticipated CPI below 2% for a period. This is attributed partly to rising energy prices. Budget
measures announced by the UK Chancellor in the Autumn Statement are expected to add
around 0.5 percentage points to the CPI peak. Expectations for interest rate cuts are likely to
be moderated to a degree, though a slow and steady loosening of monetary policy is expected
over the next few years. The extent to which this situation is replicated in the Isle of Man is
uncertain; historic precedent would suggest that the Island could either over- or under-shoot
the UK CPI levels by a small amount to our close connections. The central assumption would
be relatively stable inflation of just above 2% throughout 2025 and 2026, in line with the UK.
6