Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Five Year Financial Plan
3.5 Structural Deficit and Reserves Position
In Table 4 the operating surplus shows the amount of residual income after expenditure for
activities excluding those funded from the National Insurance Fund, capital expenditure and
internal funds. This analysis is to provide information on the financing of Government’s
ongoing activities that are funded through the revenue account.
The transfers from General Revenue to the Capital Financing Reserve are excluded from
operating items and the estimated capital spending is then included in the structural deficit.
The net funding within the Consolidated Loans Fund relates to loan funding for entities outside
of Central Government (Manx Utilities Authority, Manx National Heritage and Isle of Man
Steam Packet Group) and this has been excluded from the structural deficit calculations.
These are considered to be arm’s length loans and do not represent funding and spending
associated with the general revenue funded Capital Programme for Central Government.
An overall net deficit is projected, on a reducing basis, for 2025-26 to 2027-28 but then a
surplus is forecast from 2028-29 for the remaining period of the indicative financial plan.
The structural deficit in 2023-24 was £103.1m as the Government finances continued to suffer
from the effects of pay awards being higher than budgeted allocations and significant inflation
in energy prices and supplies and services. Even though income receipts were in excess of
budgeted levels, this was not sufficient to offset the increased expenditure levels. This was
however, an improved position compared to the budgeted structural deficit of £156.7m for
2023-24.
The forecast structural deficit for 2024-25 is slightly higher than budgeted for the year, being
£91.4m against the budgeted position of £89.7m. The indicative financial plan shows a
generally improving position over the years presented however there will still be a level of
reliance on the investment returns being generated by reserves in order to support the
activities of Government.
Although 2024-25 has seen inflation rates gradually reduce to levels in line with long term
trends, departmental budgets will continue to face cost pressure, including those from pay
awards, strong financial discipline and stringent budget control will be required in order to meet
the medium term financial plan.
The proposed budget and indicative financial plan includes provision to fully fund the estimated
£60m per year Capital Financing Reserve programme from revenue by 2027-28 and
subsequent years. This is based on the assumption that the capital programme and delivery
of capital schemes remain stable and assumes that inflation remains in line with long term
trends.
Overall reserves are forecast to remain relatively stable in the near-term due to improved
investment performance being offset by the requirement to make drawdowns to fund
Government activities, albeit these drawdowns are forecast to be at a reduced level.
The introduction of the updated investment mandate and appointment of new investment
managers, is aimed at maximising the returns on Government’s reserves which should allow
the balances to begin to grow once again.
12