Isle of Man Budget 2025-26
Appendix 7 – Explanation of Reserves
Legal Costs Reserve (LCR)
The Isle of Man Government has previously been subject to several large and complex legal
cases which have placed a strain on the resources of the departments involved. Given the ad-
hoc nature of these cases, this reserve provides funding to meet the costs of agreed and
exceptional legal cases. The Treasury has approved a transfer of £0.75 million to the fund in
2025-26 in order to maintain the balance.
Medical Indemnity Fund (MED)
Established in 1994, this reserve acts as a cash-limited self-insurance fund to meet valid
claims for damages on behalf of patients against health and care staff working in the Island’s
hospitals. A transfer of £3 million is recommended into the fund in 2025-26 in order to be able
to meet future demands.
Seized Assets Fund (SAF)
The purpose of this fund has been to enable the proceeds of drug seizures and other crimes
to be applied to counter criminal activities as well as to promote and implement community
safety initiatives including grant assistance to counter the undesirable effects of drugs and
alcohol.
On 1 November 2017, the Fund became a statutory Fund by virtue of The Statute Law
Revision Act 2017, which inserted Section 222 ZA to the Proceeds of Crime Act 2008.
Statutory responsibility for approvals is held by the board of the Financial Intelligence Unit
Board subject to Treasury concurrence.
Project Development Fund (PDF)
This fund was established as part of the 2022-23 budget. Departments are able to make bids
for funding to complete initial feasibility and development work in relation to capital projects
before detailed business cases are submitted. This allows departments to present accurate
costing and timeline information to Treasury to assist with the consideration of capital project
business cases. A further £5 million is being transferred to this fund for 2025-26.
Housing and Communities Fund (HCF)
The HCF was established in the prior year to support the work of the Housing and
Communities Board. A further £1 million of funding is being allocated to the fund for 2025-26.
Housing Deficiency Fund (HDF)
The HDF is being established as part of the 2025-26 budget. The fund will be used to fund the
ongoing local authority social housing deficiency, with the initial funding coming from the
Department of Infrastructure revenue budget, where this has been suffered in previous years.
Climate Change Fund (CCF)
This fund was established in 2022-23 with an initial balance of £25 million being transferred
from general reserves to support climate change initiatives on the Island. A further £11 million
was added to this fund in 2023-24 through the transfer of the balance from the Environmental
Protection Fund, to create a single climate change fund.
Housing Reserve Fund (HRF)
Established in 2002, the Housing Reserve Fund was designed to provide finance for housing
related projects, in particular the delivery of the Government’s social housing policy. Amounts
from this fund are transferred into the Capital Fund to meet the cost of any housing projects
that are approved by Tynwald.
89